THE HIGH COURT FOR THE STATE OF TELANGANA
AT HYDERABAD

W.P.NO. B. Sankara Rao S/o Late B. Malla Rao,

Aged about 39 years, Occ : Chartered Accountant,
R/o Flat no 12, SK Towers,

Begumpet, Hyderabad-500016. The State of Telangana,
Rep., by its Principal Secretary,
Municipal Administration and Urban
Development Department, Secretariat,
Hyderabad. The Deputy City Planner,
GHMC, Hyderabad (HO). Kontham Narsing Rao S/o Late K. Swamy,
Aged about 72 years, Occ : Business,
R/o, West Maredpally,
Secunderabad. 62, Road No.4 Threemoorthy Colony,
Mahendra Hills, East Marredpally, Secunderabad. I am also deposing on behalf of Petitioners No. It is submitted that the Petitioners herein are the owners and possessors of several
apartments in “SK TOWERS” bearing municipal No. It is submitted that the
petitioners became the owners and possessors of apartments in the above named
“SK TOWERS” through various sale deeds executed by Mr. K. Narsingh Rao and
14 others belonging to the Kontham family represented by their G.P.A Holder

who is Respondent No.9 herein. 56632/07/08/2014/HO dated 13.10.2014 from Respondent

No.2 with zero deviations and the apartments were occupied by owners andpossessors from 2014 onwards. 209 situated at Brahmanwadi, Begumpet village. It is submitted that the being aware of the above scenario,
Respondents No. It is submitted that as per the Development Agreement cum
Irrevocable General Power of Attorney dated 10.07.2006 entered into by
Respondents 10 to 14 and 10 others and Respondent No.9, no rights were
reserved to Respondents No. 10 to 14 and 10 others to use any approach road
through “SK TOWERS” to approach their land situated to the north of “SK
TOWERS”. 10 to 14 have intentionally misrepresented the same10. It is submitted that the
welfare association of which the petitioners are a part of replied immediately
stating that the same must be discussed by the committee and in the mean time no

JCB or men can be sent for any work on their land. 17 along with several henchmen brought one JCB to start the
ground clearance work despite no permission from the association of “SK
TOWERS”. It is
submitted that they had arrived again on the next day, however permission was

denied once again. 7 and 8 on 23.02.2020 and obtained an acknowledgement for
the same. Several attempts were
made on the same day by them to threaten and scare the petitioners and other
residents. The same was witnessed by several police personnel who were present. However to their surprise, Respondents No. 8 did not register our complaint and in turn
asked us to settle the matter. 10 to 17 are harassing the residents of the
building by using the approach road situated within “SK TOWERS”, for the entry

of heavy machinery and vehicles along with several laborers disrupting the peaceof the residents and making the entrance to apartment very dangerous and unsafe
to children and senior citizens causing inconvenience and nuisance to the

residents of “SK TOWERS”. In view of
the above, the Petitioner herein is left with no other option other than approaching
this Hon’ble Court seeking indulgence of this Hon’ble court to direct Respondents
No. 2 to 6 not to
award building permission to Respondents No. For the reasons sated above and those reasons those may be adduced at the
time of hearing, it is prayed that this Hon’ble court may be pleased to grant an order
or direction or writ, more so in the nature of writ of mandamus declaring the inaction
of the Respondent No. 2 to 6 in considering the representation dated 10.03.2020 made

by the Petitioners herein against Respondents No.