Dr. M. Ismail Faruqui Etc, Mohd. ... vs Union Of India And Others on 24 October, 1994

Supreme Court of India

Dr. M. Ismail Faruqui Etc, Mohd. ... vs Union Of India And Others on 24 October, 1994
Equivalent citations: AIR 1995 SC 605 A

Bench: M V Verma, G Ray, S Bharucha

ORDER

1. We have just enough religion to make us hate, but not enough to make us love one another." Jonathan Swift

2. Swami Vivekananda said 
Religion is not in doctrines, in dogmas, nor in intellectual argumentation; it is being and becoming,
it is realisation.

This thought comes to mind as we contemplate the roots of this controversy. Genesis of this dispute
is traceable to erosion of some fundamental values of the plural commitments of our polity.

3. The constitutional validity of the Acquisition of Certain Area at Ayodhya Act, 1993 (No. 33 of
1993) (hereinafter referred to as "Act No. 33 of 1993" or "the Act") and the maintainability of Special
Reference No. 1 of 1993 (hereinafter referred to as "the Special Reference") made by the President of
India under Article 143(1) of the Constitution of India are the questions for decision herein. The
background in which these questions are to be answered is contained in the facts stated in the White
Paper on Ayodhya, February 1993, issued by the Government of India.

4. Certain undisputed facts emerging at the hearing may also have relevance for this purpose. These
questions are answered on this basis, eschewing facts which are in the area of controversy and have
yet to be adjudicated.

BACKGROUND

5. The Bill was introduced in Parliament leading to the above enactment and the said Reference to
this Court was made in the historical background set out in the White Paper. Indeed, the two
simultaneous acts are an indication of the legislative intent for enactment of the statute, the
reference being made as a part of the same exercise with a view "to effectuate the purpose of the
enactment. This is how, they have to be viewed.

6. The "Overview" at the commencement of the White Paper in Chapter 1 states thus:
1.1 Ayodhya situated in the north of India is a township in District Faizabad of Uttar Pradesh. It has
long been a place of holy pilgrimage because of its mention in the epic Ramayana as the place of
birth of Shri Ram. The structure commonly known as Ram Janma Bhoomi-Babri Masjid was erected
as a mosque by one Mir Baqi in Ayodhya in 1528 A.D. It is claimed by some sections that it was built
at the site believed to be the birth-spot of Shri Ram where a temple had stood earlier. This resulted
in a long-standing dispute.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37494799/ 1Dr. M. Ismail Faruqui Etc, Mohd. ... vs Union Of India And Others on 24 October, 1994

1.2 The controversy entered a new phase with the placing of idols in the disputed structure in
December, 1949. The premises were attached under Section 145 of the CrPC. Civil suits were filed
shortly thereafter. Interim orders in these civil suits restrained the parties from removing the idols
or interfering with their worship. In effect, therefore, from December, 1949 till December 6, 1992
the structure had not been used as a mosque.

7. The movement to construct a Ram-temple at the site of the disputed structure gathered
momentum in recent years which became a matter of great controversy and a source of tension. This
led to several parleys the details of which are not very material for the present purpose. These
parleys involving the Vishva Hindu Parishad (VHP) and the All India Babri Masjid Action
Committee (AIBMAC), however, failed to resolve the dispute. A new dimension was added to the
campaign for construction of the temple with the formation of the Government in Uttar Pradesh in
June 1991 by the Bhartiya Janata Party (BJP) which declared its commitment to the construction of
the temple and took certain steps like the acquisition of land adjoining the disputed structure while
leaving out the disputed structure itself from the acquisition. The focus of the temple construction
movement from October 1991 was to start construction of the temple by way of 'kar-sewa' on the
land acquired by the Government of Uttar Pradesh while leaving the disputed structure intact. This
attempt did not succeed and there was litigation in the Allahabad High Court as well as in this
Court. There was a call for resumption of kar sewa from 6th December, 1992 and the announcement
made by the organisers was for a symbolic kar sewa without violation of the court orders including
those made in the proceedings pending in this Court. In spite of initial reports from Ayodhya on 6th
December, 1992 indicating an air of normalcy, around mid-day a crowd addressed by leaders of BJP,
VHP, etc., climbed the Ram Janma Bhumi-Babri Masjid (RJB-BM) structure and started damaging
the domes. Within a short time, the entire structure was demolished and razed to the ground.
Indeed, it was an act of "national shame". What was demolished was not merely an ancient
structure; but "the faith of the minorities in the sense of justice and fair play of majority. It shook
their faith in the rule of law and constitutional processes. A five hundred year old structure which
was defenceless and whose safety was a sacred trust in the hands of the State Government was
demolished.

8. After referring to the details on this tragedy, the White Paper in Chapter 1 on "OVERVIEW"
concludes thus :
1.35. The demolition of the Ram Janma Bhoomi-Babri Masjid structure at Ayodhya on 6th
December, 1992 was a most reprehensible act. The perpetrators of this deed struck not only against
a place of worship, but also at the principles of secularism, democracy and the rule of law enshrined
in our Constitution. In a move as sudden as it was shameful, a few thousand people managed to
outrage the sentiments of millions of Indians of all communities who have reacted to this incident
with anguish and dismay.

1.36 What happened on December 6, 1992 was not a failure of the system as a whole, nor of the
wisdom inherent in India's Constitution, nor yet of the power of tolerance, brotherhood and
compassion that has so vividly informed the life of independent India. It was, the Supreme Court
observed on that day, "a great pity that a Constitutionally elected Government could not discharge

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37494799/ 2Dr. M. Ismail Faruqui Etc, Mohd. ... vs Union Of India And Others on 24 October, 1994

its duties in a matter of this sensitiveness and magnitude." Commitments to the Court and
Constitution, pledges to Parliament and the people, were simply cast aside. Therein lay the failure,
therein the betrayal.

1.37 Today India seeks to heal, and not reopen its wounds; to look forward with hope, and not
backwards with fear; to reconcile reason with faith. Above all, India is determined to press ahead
with the National Agenda, undeterred by aberrations.

9. It may be mentioned that a structure called the Ram-chabutra stood on the disputed site within
the courtyard of the disputed structure. This structure also was demolished on 6th December, 1992
(Appendix-V to the White Paper). Worship of the idols installed on the Ram-chabutra by Hindu
devotees in general, it appears, had been performed for a considerable period of time without any
objection by the Muslims to its worship at that place, prior to the shifting of the idols from the
Ram-chabutra to the disputed structure in December 1949. As a result of demolition of
Ram-chabutra also on 6th December 1992, the worship by Hindus in general even at that place was
interrupted. Thereafter, the worship of idols is being performed only by a priest nominated for the
purpose without access to the public.

10. A brief reference to certain suits in this connection may now be made. In 1950, two suits were
filed by some Hindus; in one of these suits in January 1950. the trial court passed interim orders
whereby the idols remained at the place where they were installed in December 1949 and their Puja
by the Hindus continued. The interim order was confirmed by the High Court in April 1955. On ist
February, 1986, the District Judge ordered the opening of the lock placed on a grill leading to the
sanctum-sanctorum of the shrine in the disputed structure and permitted Puja by the Hindu
devotees. In 1959, a suit was filed by the Nirmohi Akhara claiming title to the disputed structure. In
1961, another suit was filed claiming title to the disputed structure by the Sunni Central Wakf Board.
In 1989, Deoki Nandan Agrawal, as the next friend of the Deity filed a title suit in respect of the
disputed structure. In 1989, the aforementioned suits were transferred to the Allahabad High Court
and were ordered to be heard together. On 14th August, 1989. the High Court ordered the
maintenance of status quo in respect of the disputed structure (Appendix-I to the White Paper). As
earlier mentioned, it is stated in para 1.2 of the White Paper that:

interim orders in these civil suits restrained the parties from removing the idols or interfering with
their worship. In effect, therefore, from December, 1949 till December 6, 1992 the structure had not
been used as a mosque.

11. Prior to December 1949 when the idols were shifted into the disputed structure from the
Ram-chabutra, worship by Hindu devotees at the Ram-chabutra for a long time without any
objection from Muslims is also beyond controversy. A controversy, however, is raised about use of
the disputed structure as a mosque from 1934 to December 1949. One version is that after some
disturbances in 1934, the use of the disputed structure as a mosque had been stopped from 1934
itself and not merely from December 1949. The other side disputes the alleged disuse of the mosque
for prayers prior to December 1949. The stand of the Uttar Pradesh Government in the suits was
that the place was used as a mosque till 1949.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37494799/ 3Dr. M. Ismail Faruqui Etc, Mohd. ... vs Union Of India And Others on 24 October, 1994

12. As a result of the incidents at Ayodhya on 6th December, 1992, the President of India issued a
proclamation under Article 356 of the Constitution of India assuming to himself all the functions of
the Government of Uttar Pradesh, dissolving the U.P. Vidhan Sabha. The White Paper in Chapter II
mentions the "BACKGROUND" and therein it is stated as under:

2.1 At the center of the. RJB-BM dispute is the demand voiced by Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP)
and its allied organisations for the restoration of a site said to be the birth place of Sri Ram in
Ayodhya. Till 6th December, 1992 this site was occupied by the structure erected in 1528 by 'Mir
Baqi' who claimed to have built it on; orders of the first Mughal Emperor Babar; This structure has
been described in the old Government records as Masjid Janmasthan. It is now commonly retired to
as Ram Janma Bhumi-Babri Masjid.

2.2 The VHP and its allied organisations base their demand on the assertion that this site is the birth
place of Sri Ram and a Hindu temple commemorating this site stood here till it was destroyed on
Babar's command and a Masjid was erected in its place. The demand of the VHP has found support
from the Bhartiya Janata Party (BJP). The construction of a Ram temple at the disputed site, after
removal or relocation of the existing structure, was a major plank in BJP's campaign during
elections held in 1989 and 1991. Other major political parties, however, had generally opposed this
demand and had taken the stand that while a temple should be built, the issues in dispute should be
resolved either by negotiations or by orders of the Court.

2.3 During the negotiations aimed at finding an amicable solution to the dispute, one issue which
came to the fore was whether a Hindu temple had existed on the site occupied by the disputed
structure and whether it was demolished on Babar's orders for the construction of the Masjid. It was
stated on behalf of the Muslim organisations, as well as by certain eminent historians, that there was
no evidence in favour of either of these two assertions. It was also stated by certain Muslim leaders
that if these assertions were proved, the Muslims would voluntarily handover the disputed shrine to
the Hindus. Naturally, this became the central issue in the negotiations between the VHP and
AIBMAC.

XXX XXX XXX 2.12 The historical debate has thus remained inconclusive although much progress
has been made in identifying the areas of agreement and difference. Conclusive findings can be
obtained only by way of reference to a competent authority. However, as brought out elsewhere in
this Paper the negotiations were disrupted at a crucial phase. Now, the entire evidence has
disappeared along with the disputed structure. It is tragic and ironical that the Ram-chabutra and
Kaushalya Rasoi, which continued as places of worship during periods of Muslim and British rule
have disappeared along with the RJB-BM structure at the hands of people professing to be 'devotees'
of Lord Ram.

PLACING OF IDOLS IN THE DISPUTED STRUCTURE 2.13 As has been mentioned above, Hindu
structures of worship already existed in the outer courtyard of the RJB-BM structure. On the night
of 22nd/23rd December, 1949, however, Hindu idols were placed under the central dome of the
main structure. Worship of these idols was started on a big scale from the next morning. As this was
likely to disturb the public peace, the civil administration attached the premises under Section 145

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37494799/ 4Dr. M. Ismail Faruqui Etc, Mohd. ... vs Union Of India And Others on 24 October, 1994

of the CrPC. This was the starting point of a whole chain of events which ultimately led to the
demolition of the structure. The main events of this chain have been summarised in Apppendix-I.

2.14 Soon after the installation of the idols two civil suits were filed by Hindu plaintiffs seeking to
restrain the Administration from removing the idols from the disputed structure or placing any
restrictions in the way of devotees intending to offer worship. Interim injunctions were issued by the
civil court to this effect. These injunctions were confirmed by the Allahabad High Court in 1955.

2.15 The Hindu Idols thus continued inside the disputed structure since 1949. Worship of these idols
by Hindus also continued without interruption since 1949 and the structure was not used by the
Muslim's for offering prayers since then. The controversy remained at a low ebb till 1986 when the
District Court of Faizabad ordered opening of the lock placed on a grill leading to the
sanctum-sanctorum of the shrine. An organisation called the Babri Masjid Action Committee
(BMAC), seeking restoration of the disputed shrine to the Muslims came into being and launched a
protest movement. The Hindu organisations, on the other hand, stepped up their activities to
mobilise public opinion for the construction of a Ram temple at the disputed site.

13. After the imposition of President's rule in the State of Uttar Pradesh as a consequence of the
events at Ayodhya on 6th December, 1992, action taken by the Central Government is detailed in
Chapter VIII of the White Paper with reference to the communal situation in the country which
deteriorated sharply following the demolition of the RJB-BM structure on 6th December, 1992 and
spread of communal violence in several other States. Para 9.11 in Chapter VIII relating to the
"ACTION TAKEN BY THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT" is as under :
8.11 Mention has been made above (Overview) of the decisions taken on 7th December by the
Government to ban communal organisations, to take strong action for prosecution of the offences
connected with the demolition, to fix responsibilities of various authorities for their lapses relating
to the events of December 6, to rebuild the demolished structure and to take appropriate steps
regarding new Ram Temple. The last two decisions were further elaborated on 27th December as
follows:

The Government has decided to acquire all areas in dispute in the suits pending in the Allahabad
High Court. It has also been decided to acquire suitable adjacent area. The acquired area excluding
the area on which the disputed structure stood would be made available to two Trusts which would
be set up for construction of a Ram Temple and a Mosque respectively and for planned development
of the area.

The Government of India has also decided to request the President to seek the opinion of the
Supreme Court on the question whether there was a Hindu temple existing on the site where the
disputed structure stood. The Government has also decided to abide by the opinion of the Supreme
Court and to take appropriate steps to enforce the Court's opinion. Notwithstanding the acquisition
of the disputed area, the Government would ensure that the position existing prior to the
promulgation of the Ordinance is maintained until such time as the Supreme Court gives its opinion
in the matter. Thereafter the rights of the parties shall be determined in the light of the Court's

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37494799/ 5Dr. M. Ismail Faruqui Etc, Mohd. ... vs Union Of India And Others on 24 October, 1994

opinion.

In pursuance of these decisions an Ordinance named ‘Acquisition of Certain Area at Ayodhya
Ordinance’ was issued on 7th January, 1993 for acquisition of 67.703 acres of land in the Ram
Janma Bhoomi-Babri Masjid complex. A reference to the Supreme Court under Article 143 of the
Constitution was also made on the same day. Copy of the Ordinance is at Appendix-XV and of the
Reference at Appendix-XVI.

14. The Acquisition of Certain Area at Ayodhya Ordinance, 1993 (No. 8 of 1993) has been "replaced
by the Acquisition of Certain Area at Ayodhya Act, 1993 (No. 33 of 1993), the constitutional validity
of which has to be examined by us.

15. The said Ordinance, later replaced by Act No. 33 of 1993, and the Special Reference under Article
143(1) of the Constitution of India were made simultaneously the same day on 7th January, 1993. It
would be appropriate at this stage to quote, in extenso, the Statement of Objects and Reasons for
this enactment, the said Act No. 33 of 1993, and the Special Reference under Article 143(1) of the
Constitution:

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS There has been a long-standing dispute relating to the
erstwhile Ram-Janma Bhumi-Babri Masjid structure in Ayodhya which led to communal tension
and violence from time to time and ultimately led to the destruction of the disputed structure on 6th
December, 1992. This was followed by wide-spread communal violence which resulted in large
number of deaths, injuries and destruction of property in various parts of the country. The said
dispute has thus affected the maintenance of public order and harmony between different
communities in the country. As it is necessary to maintain communal harmony and the spirit of
common brotherhood amongst the people of India, it was considered necessary to acquire the site of
the disputed structure and suitable adjacent land for setting up a complex which could be developed
in a planned manner wherein a Ram temple, a mosque, amenities for pilgrims, a library, museum
and other suitable facilities can be set up.

2. The Acquisition of Certain Area at Ayodhya Ordinance, 1993 was accordingly promulgated by the
President on 7th January, 1993. By virtue of the said Ordinance the right, title and interest in
respect of certain areas at Ayodhya specified in the Schedule to the Ordinance stand transferred to,
and vest in, the Central Government.

3. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance.

S. B. CHAVAN.

NEW DELHI, The 9th March, 1993.

SPECIAL REFERENCE WHEREAS a dispute has arisen whether a Hindu temple or any Hindu
religious structure existed prior to the construction of the structure (including the premises of the

inner and outer courtyards of such structure), commonly known as the Ram Janma Bhumi-Babri

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37494799/ 6Dr. M. Ismail Faruqui Etc, Mohd. ... vs Union Of India And Others on 24 October, 1994

Masjid, in the area in which the structure stood in village Kot Ramachandra in Ayodhya, in Pargana
Haveli Avadh, in Tehsil Faizabad Sadar, in the district of Faizabad of the State of Uttar Pradesh;

2. AND WHEREAS the said area is located in Revenue Plot Nos. 159 and 160 in the said village Kot
Ramchandra;

3. AND WHEREAS the said dispute has affected the maintenance of public order and harmony
between different communities in the country;

4. AND WHEREAS the aforesaid area vests in the Central Government by virtue of the Acquisition
of Certain Area at Ayodhya Ordinance, 1993;

5. AND WHEREAS notwithstanding the vesting of the aforesaid area in the Central Government
under the said Ordinance the Central Government proposes to settle the said dispute after obtaining
the opinion of the Supreme Court of India and in terms of the said opinion;

6. AND WHEREAS in view of what has been herein before stated it appears to me that the question
hereinafter set out has arisen and is of such a nature and of such public importance that it is
expedient to obtain the opinion of the Supreme Court of India thereon;

7. NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon me by Clause (1) of Article 143 of
the Constitution of India, I, Shanker Dayal Sharma, President, of India, hereby refer the following
question to the Supreme Court of India for consideration and opinion thereon, namely:

Whether a Hindu temple or any Hindu religious structure existed prior to the construction of the
Ram Janma Bhumi-Babri Masjid (including the premises of the inner and outer courtyards of such
structure) in the area on which the structure stood?

Sd/
President of India New Delhi:

Dated 7th January, 1993.

THE ACQUISITION OF CERTAIN AREA AT AYODHYA ACT, 1993 (NO. 33 OF 1993) (3rd April,
1993) An Act to provide for the acquisition of certain area at Ayodhya and for matters, connected
therewith or incidental thereto.

WHEREAS there has been a long-standing dispute relating to the structure (including the premises
of the inner and outer courtyards of such structure), commonly known as the Ram Janma

Bhumi-Babri Masjid, situated in village Kot Ramachandra in Ayodhya, in Pargana Haveli Avadh, in
Tehsil Faizabad Sadar, in the district of Faizabad of the State of Uttar Pradesh;

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37494799/ 7Dr. M. Ismail Faruqui Etc, Mohd. ... vs Union Of India And Others on 24 October, 1994

AND WHEREAS the said dispute has affected the maintenance of public order and harmony
between different communities in the country;

AND WHEREAS it is necessary to maintain public order and to promote communal harmony and
the spirit of common brotherhood amongst the people of India;

AND WHEREAS with a view to achieving the aforesaid objectives, it is necessary to acquire certain,
areas in Ayodhya;

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY

1. Short title and commencement.-(1) This Act may be called the Acquisition of Certain Area at
Ayodhya Act, 1993.

(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 7th day of January, 1993.
2. Definitions.- In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,
(a) "area" means the area (including all the buildings, structures or other properties comprised
therein) specified in the Schedule;

(b) "authorised person" means a person or body of persons or trustees of any trust authorised by the
Central Government under Section 7;

(c) "Claims Commissioner" means the Claims Commissioner appointed under Sub-section (2) of
Section 8;

(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
CHAPTER IT ACQUISITION OF THE AREA IN AYODHYA

3. Acquisition of rights in respect of certain area.- On and from the commencement of this Act, the
right, title and interest in relation to the area shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and
vest in, the Central Government.

4. General effect of vesting.- (1) The area shall be deemed to include all assets, rights, leaseholds,
powers, authority and privileges and all property, movable and immovable, including lands,
buildings, structures, shops of whatever nature or other properties and all other rights and interests
in, or arising out of, such properties as were immediately before the commencement of this Act in
the ownership, possession, power or control of any person or the State Government of Uttar
Pradesh, as the case may be, and all registers, maps, plans, drawings and other documents of
whatever nature relating thereto.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37494799/ 8Dr. M. Ismail Faruqui Etc, Mohd. ... vs Union Of India And Others on 24 October, 1994

(2) All properties aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government under Section 3 shall, by
force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and
all other encumbrances affecting them and any attachment, injunction decree or order of any court
or tribunal or other authority restricting the use of such properties in any manner or appointing any
receiver in respect of the whole or any part of such properties shall cease to have any effect.

(3) If, on the commencement of this Act, any suit, appeal or other proceeding in respect of the right,
title and interest relating to any property which has vested in the Central Government under Section
3, is pending before any court, tribunal or other authority, the same shall abate.

5. Duty of person or State Government in charge of the management of the area to deliver all assets,
etc.-(1) The Central Government may take all necessary steps to secure possession of the area which
is vested in that Government under Section 3, (2) On the vesting of the area in the Central
Government under Section 3, the person or State Government of Uttar Pradesh, as the case may be,
in charge of the management of the area immediately before such vesting shall be bound to deliver
to the Central Government or the authorised person, all assets, registers and other documents in
their custody relating to such vesting or where it is not practicable to deliver such registers or
documents, the copies of such registers or documents authenticated in the prescribed manner.

6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the area in another authority or body or trust.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sections 3, 4, 5 and 7, the Central Government may, if it
is satisfied that any authority or other body, or trustees of any trust, set up on or after the
commencement of this Act is or are willing to comply with such terms and conditions as that
Government may think fit to impose, direct by notification in the Official Gazette, that the right, title
and interest or any of them in relation to the area or any part thereof, instead of continuing to vest
in the Central Government, vest in that authority or body or trustees of that trust either on the date
of the notification or on such later date as may be specified in the notification.

(2) When any right, title and interest in relation to the area or part thereof vest in the authority or
body or trustees referred to in Sub-section (1), such rights of the Central Government in relation to
such area or part thereof, shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the
rights of that authority or body or trustees of that trust.

(3) The provisions of Sections 4, 5, 7 and 11 shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to such
authority or body or trustees as they apply in relation to the Central Government and for this
purpose references therein to the "Central Government" shall be construed as references to such
authority or body or trustees.

CHAPTER ITI MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF PROPERTY

7. Management of property by Government.- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any
contract or instrument or order of any court, tribunal or other authority to the contrary, on and from
the commencement of this Act, the property vested in the Central Government under Section 3 shall

be managed by the Central Government or by a person or body of persons of trustees of any trust

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37494799/ 9Dr. M. Ismail Faruqui Etc, Mohd. ... vs Union Of India And Others on 24 October, 1994

authorised by that Government in this behalf.

(2) In managing the property vested in the Central Government under Section 3, the Central
Government or the authorised person shall ensure that the position existing before the
commencement of this Act in the area on which the structure (including the premises of the inner
and outer courtyards of such structure), commonly known as the Ram Janma Bhumi - Babri Masjid,
stood in village Kot Ramachandra in Ayodhya, in Pargana Haveli Avadh, in Tehsil Faizabad Sadar,
in the district of Faizabad of the State of Uttar Pradesh is maintained.

CHAPTER IV MISCELLANEOUS

8. Payment of amount.- (1) The owner of any land, building, structure or other property comprised
in the area shall be given by the Central Government, for the transfer to and vesting in that
Government under Section 3 of that land, building, structure or other property, in cash an amount
equivalent to the market value of the land, building, structure or other property.

(2) The Central Government shall, for the purpose of deciding the claim of the owner or any person
having a claim against the owner under Sub-section (1), by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint a Claims Commissioner.

(3) The Claims Commissioner shall regulate his own procedure for receiving and deciding the
claims.

(4) The owner or any person having a claim against the owner may make a claim to the Claims
Commissioner within a period of ninety days from the date of commencement of this Act;

Provided that if the Claims Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient
cause from preferring the claim within the said period of ninety days, the Claims Commissioner may
entertain the claim within a further period of ninety days and not thereafter.

g. Act to override all other enactments.- The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or any
instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act or any decree or order of any court,
tribunal or other authority.

10. Penalties.- Any person who is in charge of the management of the area and fails to deliver to the
Central Government or the authorised person any asset, register or other document in his custody
relating to such area or, as the case may be, authenticated copies of such register or document, shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which
may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.

11. Protection of action taken in good faith.- No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie
against the Central Government or the authorised person or any of the officers or other employees of

that Government or the authorised person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37494799/ 10Dr. M. Ismail Faruqui Etc, Mohd. ... vs Union Of India And Others on 24 October, 1994

done under this Act.

12. Power to make rules.- (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.

(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the sessions immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not
be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.

13. Repeal and saving.- (1) Subject to the provisions of Sub-section (2), the Acquisition of Certain
Area at Ayodhya Ordinance, 1993, is hereby repealed.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the said Ordinance,
(a) the right, title and interest in relation to plot No. 242 situated in village Kot Ramachandra
specified against Sl. No. 1 of the Schedule to the said Ordinance shall be deemed never to have been
transferred to, and vested in, the Central Government;

(b) any suit, appeal or other proceeding in respect of the right, title and interest relating to the said
plot No. 242, pending before any court, tribunal or other authority, shall be deemed never to have
abated and such suit, appeal or other proceeding (including the orders or interim orders of any court
thereon) shall be deemed to have been restored to the position existing immediately before the
commencement of the said Ordinance;

(c) any other action taken or thing done under that Ordinance in relation to the said plot No. 242
shall be deemed never to have been taken or done.

(3) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall
be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.

THE SCHEDULE (See Section 2(a)) DESCRIPTION OF THE AREA XXX XXX XXX

16. At the hearing, it was strenuously urged that the question of fact referred under Article 143(1) of
the Constitution is vague; the answer to it is by itself not decisive of the real controversy since the
core question has not been referred; and it also gives no definite indication of the manner in which
the Central Government intends to act after the Special Reference is answered, to settle the dispute.
It was urged that the question referred is, therefore, academic, apart from being vague, and it does
not serve any constitutional purpose to subserve which the advisory jurisdiction of this Court could
be invoked; that the real object and purpose of reference is to take away a place of worship of the

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37494799/ 14Dr. M. Ismail Faruqui Etc, Mohd. ... vs Union Of India And Others on 24 October, 1994

Muslims and give it away to the Hindus offending the basic feature of secularism; and that,
therefore, we should decline to answer the Special Reference. The learned Solicitor General who
appeared for the Union of India was asked to clarify the stand of the Central Government on this
point. Initially, it was stated by the learned Solicitor General that the answer to the question would
provide the basis for further negotiations between the different groups to settle the controversy and
the Central Government would then be able to decide the effective course available to it for resolving
the controversy. On being asked to further clarify the stand of the Central Government about the
purpose of the Special Reference, the learned Solicitor General made a statement in writing on
behalf of the Union of India on 14th September, 1994 as under:
Government stands by the policy of secularism and of even-handed treatment of all religious
communities. The Acquisition of Certain Area at Ayodhya Act, 1993, as well as the Presidential
Reference, have the objective of maintaining public order and promoting communal harmony and
the spirit of common brotherhood amongst the people of India.

Government is committed to the construction of a Ram temple and a mosque, but their actual
location will be determined only after the Supreme Court renders its opinion in the Presidential
Reference.

Government will treat the finding of the Supreme Court on the question of fact referred under
Article 143 of the Constitution as a verdict which is final and binding.

In the light of the Supreme Court's opinion and consistent with it, Government will make efforts to
resolve the controversy by a process of negotiations. Government is confident that the opinion of the
Supreme Court will have a salutary effect on the attitude of the communities and they will no longer
take conflicting positions on the factual issue settled by the Supreme Court.

If efforts at, a negotiated settlement as aforesaid do not succeed, Government is committed to
enforce a solution in the light of the Supreme Court's opinion and consistent with it. Government's
action in this regard will be even-handed in respect of both the communities. If the question
referred is answered in the affirmative, namely, that a Hindu temple/structure did exist prior to the
construction of the demolished structure, Government action will be in support of the wishes of the
Hindu community. If, on the other hand, the question is answered in the negative, namely, that no
such Hindu temple/ structure existed at the relevant time, then Government action will be in
support of the wishes of the Muslim community.

This statement in writing made by the learned Solicitor General on behalf of the Union of India
forms a part of the record and has to be taken into account to indicate the purpose for which the
Special Reference under Article 143(1) has been made to this Court.

17. The dispute and its background are mentioned in paras 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3 of Chapter II of the
White Paper quoted earlier. This is the backdrop in which the constitutional validity of Act No. 33 of
1993 and the maintainability of the Special Reference made under Article 143(1) of the Constitution
of India have to be examined.

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37494799/ 12Dr. M. Ismail Faruqui Etc, Mohd. ... vs Union Of India And Others on 24 October, 1994
VALIDITY OF ACT NO. 33 OF 1993

18. Broadly stated, the focus of challenge to the statute as a whole is on the grounds of secularism,
right to equality and right to freedom of religion. Challenge to the acquisition of the area in excess of
the disputed area is in addition on the ground that the acquisition was unnecessary being unrelated
to the dispute pertaining to the small disputed area within it. A larger argument advanced on behalf
of some of the parties who have assailed the act with considerable vehemence is that a mosque being
a place of religious worship by the Muslims, independently of whether the acquisition did affect the
right to practise religion, is wholly immune from the State's power of acquisition and the statute is,
therefore, unconstitutional as violative of Articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution of India for this
reason alone. The others, however, limited this argument of immunity from acquisition only to
places of special significance, forming an essential and integral part of the right to practise the
religion, the acquisition of which would result in the estimation of the right to freedom of religion
itself. It was also contended that the purpose of acquisition in the present case does not bring the
statute within the ambit of Entry 42, List III but is referable to Entry 1, List II and, therefore, the
Parliament did not have the competence to enact the same. It was then urged by learned Counsel
canvassing the Muslim interest that the legislation is tilted heavily in favour of the Hindu interests
and, therefore, suffers from the vice of non-secularism and discrimination in addition to violation of
the right to freedom of religion of the Muslim community. It was also urged by them that the Central
Government, after the Prime Minister's statement made on 7th December, 1992, to rebuild the
demolished structure (para 1.22 in Chapter I of the White Paper) resiled from the same and by
incorporating certain provisions in the statute has sought to perpetuate the injustice done to the
Muslim community by the act of vandalism of demolition of the structure at Ayodhya on 6th
December, 1992. On behalf of the Muslim community, it is urged that the statute read in the context
of the content of the question referred under Article 143(1) of the Constitution, as it must be, is a
mere veiled concealment of a device adopted by the Central Government to perpetuate the
consequences of the demolition of the mosque on 6th December, 1992. The grievance of the Hindu
opponents is that the mischief and acts of vandalism committed by a few are being attributed to the
entire Hindu community the majority of whom is equally hurt by, and critical of, the shameful act.
They urge that this disapproval by the majority community is evident from the result of the
subsequent elections in which the Bhartiya Janata Party was rejected at the hustings by the Hindu
majority. They also submit that the fact of demolition of Hindu structures like the Ramchabutra and
Kaushalya Rasoi which stood since ages in the disputed site resulting in interruption of even the
undisputed right of worship of Hindus within that area is being ignored. It is also contended that
there is no justification for acquisition of any property in excess of the disputed area and, therefore,
the acquisition at least of the excess area belonging, admittedly, to Hindus is invalid.

On behalf of the Central Government, it is urged that in the existing situation and in view of the
widespread communal flare-up throughout the country on account of the events at Ayodhya on 6th
December, 1992, the most appropriate course, in the opinion of the Central Government, was to
make this acquisition along with the Special Reference to decide the question which would facilitate
a negotiated solution of the problem, and if it failed, to enable the Central Government to take any
other appropriate action to resolve the controversy and restore communal harmony in the country.
It was made clear that acquisition of the disputed area was not meant to deprive the community

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37494799/ 13Dr. M. Ismail Faruqui Etc, Mohd. ... vs Union Of India And Others on 24 October, 1994

found entitled to it, of the same, or to retain any part of the excess area which was not necessary for
a proper resolution of the dispute or to effectuate the purpose of the acquisition, it was submitted
that an assurance of communal harmony throughout the country was a prime constitutional
purpose and avoidance of escalation of the dispute in the wake of the incident at Ayodhya on 6th
December, 1992 was an essential step in that direction, which undoubtedly promotes the creed of
secularism instead of impairing it. It was submitted that the charge leveled against the Central
Government of discrimination against any religious community or of anti-secularism is wholly
unwarranted.

19. Another argument advanced on behalf of the Muslim community was that the defences open to
the minority community in the suits filed by the other side including that of adverse possession by
virtue of long possession of the disputed site for over 400 years since its construction in 1528 A. D.
have also been extinguished by the acquisition, giving an unfair advantage to the other side. It was
also urged that the core question in the dispute between the parties was not the Subject-matter of
the Special Reference made under Article 143(1) of the Constitution and, therefore, answer to the
same would not result in a resolution of the dispute between the parties to the suits. It was
accordingly urged, there is deprivation of the judicial remedy for adjudication of the dispute without
the substitution of an alternate dispute resolution mechanism, which is impermissible under the
Constitution.

20. It is appropriate at this stage to refer to the provisions of the statute before we deal with the
arguments challenging its constitutional validity. The Statement of Objects and Reasons says that
there is a long-standing dispute relating to the disputed structure in Ayodhya which led to
communal tension and violence from time to time and ultimately has led to the destruction of the
disputed structure on 6th December, 1992 followed by widespread communal violence resulting in
loss of many lives and destruction of property throughout the country. The said dispute has thus
affected the maintenance of public order and communal harmony in the country. Obviously, it is
necessary to maintain and promote communal harmony and fraternity amongst the people of India.
With this objective in view it was considered necessary to acquire the site of the disputed structure
and the requisite adjacent area to be utilised in an appropriate manner to achieve this object.

For this purpose, the Acquisition of Certain Area at Ayodhya Ordinance, 1993 was promulgated by
the President on 7th January, 1993 and, simultaneously, on the same day, this Reference was also
made by the President to this Court under Article 143(1) of the Constitution. The said Ordinance was
replaced by the Acquisition of Certain Area at Ayodhya Act, 1993 (No. 33 of 1993) to the same effect,
and Section 1(2) provides that the Act shall be deemed to have come into force on the 7th January,
1993. The provisions of the said Act are now considered.

21. Section 3 provides for acquisition of rights in relation to the "area" defined in Section 2(a). It
says that on and from the commencement of this Act the right, title and interest in relation to the
area shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central Government. It is
well-settled that the meaning of "vest" takes colour from the context in which it is used and it is not
necessarily the, same in every provision or in every context. In Maharaj Singh v. State of Uttar
Pradesh , it was held :

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37494799/ 14Dr. M. Ismail Faruqui Etc, Mohd. ... vs Union Of India And Others on 24 October, 1994

...[s such a construction of 'vesting' in two different senses in the same section, sound? Yes. It is,
because ‘vesting’ is a word of slippery import and has many meanings. The context controls the text
and the purpose and scheme project the particular semantic shade or nuance of meaning. That is
why even definition clauses allow themselves to be modified by contextual compulsions....

The meaning of "vest" in Section 3 and in Section 6 is of significance in the context of the
constitutional validity of the statute. It can vary in different parts of the statute or even the same
Section, depending on the context of its use.

22. Section 4 then provides the general effect of vesting. Obviously, the effect of vesting will depend
on the meaning of the word "vest" used in Section 3 and the kind of vesting in the present context.
Sub-section (1) of Section 4 provides that the area shall be deemed to include all assets, rights, etc.
specified therein of whatever nature relating thereto. Sub-section (2) further says that all properties
aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government under Section 3 shall, by force of such
vesting, be freed and discharged from all encumbrances affecting them and any attachment,
injunction, decree or order of any Court or tribunal or other authority restricting the use of such
properties in any manner or appointing any receiver in respect of the whole or any part of the
property shall cease to have effect. In other words, the effect of such vesting is to free all properties
aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government under Section 3 of all encumbrances and the
consequence of any order of any Court or tribunal of any kind restricting their user in any manner.
Sub-section (3) of Section 4 provides for abatement of all pending suits and legal proceedings. The
meaning of the word "vest" in Section 3 has a bearing on the validity of this provision since the
consequence of abatement of suits etc. provided therein is relatable only to absolute vesting of the
disputed area which is the subject-matter of the suits and not to a situation where the vesting under
Section 3 is of a limited nature for a particular purpose, and is of limited duration till the happening
of a future event. Section 5 indicates the duty of the person or State Government in charge of the
management of the area to deliver all assets etc. to the Central Government on such vesting.
Sub-section (1) empowers the Central Government to take all necessary steps to secure possession of
the area which is vested in the Central Government under Section 3. Sub-section (2) obliges the
person or State Government of Uttar Pradesh, as the case may be, in charge of the management of
the area immediately before such vesting to deliver to the Central Government or the authorised
person all assets etc. in their custody relating to such vesting. In short, Section 5 provides the
consequential action to be taken by the Central Government with the corresponding obligation of
the person or State Government in charge of the management of the area to deliver possession of the
area, together with its management, to the Central Government, on such vesting.

23. Then comes Section 6 which is the last Section in Chapter II, to which detailed reference would
be made later. At this stage a general reference to its contents is sufficient. Section 6 contains the
power of Central Government to direct vesting of the area in another authority or body or. trust.
Sub-section (1) provides that the Central Government may, notwithstanding anything contained in
Sections 3, 4, 5 and 7, direct by notification in the Official Gazette, that the right, title and interest or
any of them in relation to the area or any part thereof, instead of continuing to vest in the Central
Government, vest in that authority or body or trustees of that trust from the specified date, if it is
satisfied that the same is willing to comply with such terms and conditions as the Central

Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37494799/ 15
government,structure,disputed,india,acquisition,court india,december,court,purpose of acquisition,temple disputed
structure,government,acquisition,disputed,india,court india,december,court,purpose of acquisition,acquisition of certain